Clinical Topic: Asthma Treatment Protocol
============================================================

Section 1: BLUE-protocol and FALLS-protocol: two applications of lung ultrasound in the critically ill.
Source: Chest (2015)
----------------------------------------
This review article describes two protocols adapted from lung ultrasound: the bedside lung ultrasound in emergency (BLUE)-protocol for the immediate diagnosis of acute respiratory failure and the fluid administration limited by lung sonography (FALLS)-protocol for the management of acute circulatory failure. These applications require the mastery of 10 signs indicating normal lung surface (bat sign, lung sliding, A-lines), pleural effusions (quad and sinusoid sign), lung consolidations (fractal and tissue-like sign), interstitial syndrome (lung rockets), and pneumothorax (stratosphere sign and the lung point). These signs have been assessed in adults, with diagnostic accuracies ranging from 90% to 100%, allowing consideration of ultrasound as a reasonable bedside gold standard. In the BLUE-protocol, profiles have been designed for the main diseases (pneumonia, congestive heart failure, COPD, asthma, pulmonary embolism, pneumothorax), with an accuracy &gt; 90%. In the FALLS-protocol, the change from A-lines to lung rockets appears at a threshold of 18 mm Hg of pulmonary artery occlusion pressure, providing a direct biomarker of clinical volemia. The FALLS-protocol sequentially rules out obstructive, then cardiogenic, then hypovolemic shock for expediting the diagnosis of distributive (usually septic) shock. These applications can be done using simple grayscale machines and one microconvex probe suitable for the whole body. Lung ultrasound is a multifaceted tool also useful for decreasing radiation doses (of interest in neonates where the lung signatures are similar to those in adults), from ARDS to trauma management, and from ICUs to points of care. If done in suitable centers, training is the least of the limitations for making use of this kind of visual medicine.

Section 2: New concepts in treatment of chronic persistent asthma. Using a stepwise protocol to control inflammation.
Source: Postgraduate medicine (1991)
----------------------------------------
Asthma continues to cause unacceptably high rates of disability and death, largely because the severity of disease is underestimated and patients are inadequately educated about their disease. When patients understand what happens during an asthma attack and its aftermath, they are more likely to notice important symptoms and to start or increase self-treatment appropriately. Physicians are responsible for teaching patients how to avoid precipitating factors and for discussing and writing down a self-treatment plan to follow in specific circumstances. The British Thoracic Society has suggested a stepwise protocol for drug treatment of asthma. Each patient must be evaluated individually and started at the appropriate step.

Section 3: Solving insomnia electronically: Sleep treatment for asthma (SIESTA): A study protocol for a randomized controlled trial.
Source: Contemporary clinical trials (2019)
----------------------------------------
Chronic insomnia is associated with poor asthma control. Cognitive-behavioral treatment for insomnia (CBT-I) is an efficacious and durable treatment for comorbid insomnia in medical and psychiatric disorders. However, the efficacy and potential accompanying mechanisms of CBT-I have not been examined in asthma. The purpose of this study is to test the efficacy of a CBT-I intervention on sleep and asthma control in adults with insomnia and asthma. We will also explore airway inflammation (i.e., exhaled nitric oxide, blood eosinophils) as a potential biological mechanism linking improvements in sleep with improvements in asthma control.

Section 4: Childhood asthma: diagnosis and treatment.
Source: Current problems in pediatrics (1993)
----------------------------------------
This discussion of asthma management should be regarded as providing guidelines, not dogma. The underlying principles of asthma management include recognition of the variability of the disease and the importance of the underlying inflammatory condition. Clinical assessment is not enough and objective monitoring with PEFR or spirometry provides important data. The treatment protocols require individualization. It is important that the patient and family are team members working together with the medical staff toward a goal of good asthma management. In the discussion of the management of asthma, much emphasis was placed on spirometry and home measurement of PEFR. Office use of spirometry is now the norm for asthma management. Providing asthmatic patients with peak flow meters and instructions in their use is part of the routine care of asthma. Instruction of the patient and family in the proper use of medications is paramount. The MDI devices need to be prescribed with careful instructions regarding their use. When the patient comes in for follow-up, part of the examination should include the patient's demonstration of how he uses this device. Discussion of the proper and safe use of bronchodilators is important. Overuse of inhaled bronchodilators may be a reflection of increasing asthma or, at the very least, evidence that the patient does not understand appropriate treatment of asthma. If a patient is dependent on regular use of an inhaled beta agent, it is likely that he would benefit from therapy directed at the underlying inflammation of asthma. The patient and the family should understand the purpose of each medication, the side effects, and the risks and benefits of their use. In particular, if steroid medications are necessary, the reasons for their use should be explained. Carefully matching the severity of the asthma with the therapeutic protocols provides an organized approach to asthma treatment. Avoiding triggers of asthma and controlling the environmental exposure to potential triggers leads to lower medication requirements and less lability. Offering the family written instructions to cope with changes in the child's condition, based on assessment of clinical and PEFR observations, allows them more autonomy and comfort in the day-to-day care of the asthmatic child.

