Clinical Topic: Atrial Fibrillation Management
============================================================

Section 1: Atrial Fibrillation Detection and Management in Hypertension.
Source: Hypertension (Dallas, Tex. : 1979) (2023)
----------------------------------------
Hypertension is prevalent in >70% of atrial fibrillation patients. In turn, hypertensive patients have up to 73% greater likelihood of atrial fibrillation. Current guidelines recommend that a systematic atrial fibrillation screening may be justified in all patients aged ≥65 years with at least 1 cardiovascular disease, including hypertension. Although most blood pressure monitors include algorithms to detect atrial fibrillation with a high sensitivity of 96 [92-98]% and specificity of 94 [91-96]%, an electrocardiography confirmation is necessary to establish a diagnosis of atrial fibrillation. Early detection and diagnosis of atrial fibrillation is important to allow initiation of atrial fibrillation management. In the Early Treatment of Atrial Fibrillation for Stroke Prevention Trial (EAST-AFNET 4), hypertension was present in 88% of participants, and early rhythm control therapy lowered the risk of adverse cardiovascular outcomes in patients with early atrial fibrillation aged >75 or with CHA

Section 2: Atrial fibrillation pathophysiology: implications for management.
Source: Circulation (2011)
----------------------------------------
Atrial fibrillation (AF), the most common sustained cardiac arrhythmia, is an important contributor to population morbidity and mortality. An arrhythmia that is particularly common in the elderly, AF is growing in prevalence with the aging of the population. Our understanding of the basic mechanisms that govern AF occurrence and persistence has been increasing rapidly. This article reviews the basic pathophysiology of AF over a broad range of levels, touching on the tissue mechanisms that maintain the arrhythmia, the relationship between clinical presentation and basic mechanisms, ion channel and transporter abnormalities that lead to ectopic impulse formation, basic models and tissue determinants of reentry, ion channel determinants of reentry, the nature and roles of electric and structural remodeling, autonomic neural components, anatomic factors, interactions between atrial and ventricular functional consequences of AF, and the basic determinants of atrial thromboembolism. We then review the potential implications of the basic pathophysiology of the arrhythmia for its management. We first discuss consequences for improved rhythm control pharmacotherapy: targeting underlying conditions, new atrium-selective drug targets, new targets for focal ectopic source suppression, and upstream therapy aiming to prevent remodeling. We then review the implications of basic mechanistic considerations for rate control therapy, AF ablation, and the prevention of thromboembolic events. We conclude with some thoughts about the future of translational research related to AF mechanisms.

Section 3: Outcomes and Management of Stressor-Associated Atrial Fibrillation: JACC State-of-the-Art Review.
Source: Journal of the American College of Cardiology (2025)
----------------------------------------
Stressor-associated atrial fibrillation (AF) is defined as new onset AF occurring in the setting of an acute and reversible physiologic stressor (eg, cardiac surgery, acute infection). Although historically viewed as transient and potentially benign, a growing body of evidence demonstrates that stressor-associated AF is prognostically important, with long-term rates of AF recurrence and AF-related adverse events (eg, stroke, heart failure) approaching those of AF occurring without a stressor. Nevertheless, key aspects of stressor-associated AF management (eg, prevention, surveillance, treatment) remain highly variable. In this state-of-the-art review, we provide a clinically oriented synthesis of the epidemiology, mechanisms, outcomes, and management of stressor-associated AF across the breadth of characterized precipitants. Within this context, we outline a pathophysiologic framework in which stressor-associated AF represents a spectrum spanning variable relative contributions of direct stressor effects, stressor-mediated substrate, and underlying predisposition (ie, modifiable and nonmodifiable AF risk factors). Stressor-associated AF episodes occurring in the setting of a strong underlying predisposition to AF (sometimes termed "provoked AF") have a higher risk of recurrence, while episodes occurring in response to a profound physiologic stressor with minimal or no underlying predisposition (sometimes termed "reversible AF") have a lower risk of recurrence. Using postcardiac surgery stressor-associated AF as an exemplar, we summarize recent advances translating greater pathophysiologic understanding (eg, role of local inflammation) into novel clinical interventions capable of reducing stressor-associated AF incidence (eg, posterior pericardiotomy). We summarize available evidence for clinical management of stressor-associated AF and offer a conceptual framework to inform care. Finally, we conclude by outlining key priorities for future research designed to facilitate precision management of stressor-associated AF, including identification of more effective preventive measures, development of models to stratify risk of recurrent AF and AF-related adverse events following a stressor-associated AF episode, and integration of patient-centered outcomes.

Section 4: Multidisciplinary management strategies for atrial fibrillation.
Source: Current problems in cardiology (2024)
----------------------------------------
There has been a significant increase in the prevalence of atrial fibrillation (AF) over the past 30 years. Pulmonary vein isolation (PVI) is an effective treatment for AF, but research investigations have shown that AF recurrence still occurs in a significant number of patients after ablation. Heart rhythm outcomes following catheter ablation are correlated with numerous clinical factors, and researchers developed predictive models by integrating risk factors to predict the risk of recurrence of atrial fibrillation. The purpose of this article is to outline the risk scores for predicting cardiac rhythm outcomes after PVI and to discuss the modifiable factors that increase the risk of recurrence of AF, with the hope of further improving catheter ablation efficacy through preoperative identification of high-risk populations and postoperative management of modifiable risk factors.

Section 5: Management of atrial fibrillation after cardiac surgery.
Source: Internal medicine journal (2019)
----------------------------------------
A best evidence topic in cardiac surgery was written according to a structured protocol addressing the question 'for post-cardiac surgery atrial fibrillation (AF), do clinical outcomes differ between rate or rhythm control strategies?' Altogether, 2174 papers were found using the reported searches, of which 5 represented the best evidence to answer the clinical question. Hospital length of stay ranged from 5.0 to 13.2 days for rate control and 5.2 to 10.3 days for rhythm control. Freedom from AF at follow up was achieved in 84.2-91 and 84.2-96% in rate and rhythm control groups respectively. Minimal serious adverse events were noted in all studies analysed and there was no difference between rate and rhythm control groups. We conclude that in the management of post-cardiac surgery, AF, rate control and rhythm control are equivalent in terms of hospital length of stay, freedom from arrhythmia at follow up and complication rates.

