Clinical Topic: Celiac Disease Management Guidelines
============================================================

Section 1: American College of Gastroenterology Guidelines Update: Diagnosis and Management of Celiac Disease.
Source: The American journal of gastroenterology (2023)
----------------------------------------
This guideline presents an update to the 2013 American College of Gastroenterology Guideline on the Diagnosis and Management of Celiac Disease with updated recommendations for the evaluation and management of patients with celiac disease (CD). CD is defined as a permanent immune-mediated response to gluten present in wheat, barley, and rye. CD has a wide spectrum of clinical manifestations that resemble a multisystemic disorder rather than an isolated intestinal disease, and is characterized by small bowel injury and the presence of specific antibodies. Detection of CD-specific antibodies (e.g., tissue transglutaminase) in the serum is very helpful for the initial screening of patients with suspicion of CD. Intestinal biopsy is required in most patients to confirm the diagnosis. A nonbiopsy strategy for the diagnosis of CD in selected children is suggested and discussed in detail. Current treatment for CD requires strict adherence to a gluten-free diet (GFD) and lifelong medical follow-up. Most patients have excellent clinical response to a GFD. Nonresponsive CD is defined by persistent or recurrent symptoms despite being on a GFD. These patients require a systematic workup to rule out specific conditions that may cause persistent or recurrent symptoms, especially unintentional gluten contamination. Refractory CD is a rare cause of nonresponsive CD often associated with poor prognosis.

Section 2: ACG clinical guidelines: diagnosis and management of celiac disease.
Source: The American journal of gastroenterology (2013)
----------------------------------------
This guideline presents recommendations for the diagnosis and management of patients with celiac disease. Celiac disease is an immune-based reaction to dietary gluten (storage protein for wheat, barley, and rye) that primarily affects the small intestine in those with a genetic predisposition and resolves with exclusion of gluten from the diet. There has been a substantial increase in the prevalence of celiac disease over the last 50 years and an increase in the rate of diagnosis in the last 10 years. Celiac disease can present with many symptoms, including typical gastrointestinal symptoms (e.g., diarrhea, steatorrhea, weight loss, bloating, flatulence, abdominal pain) and also non-gastrointestinal abnormalities (e.g., abnormal liver function tests, iron deficiency anemia, bone disease, skin disorders, and many other protean manifestations). Indeed, many individuals with celiac disease may have no symptoms at all. Celiac disease is usually detected by serologic testing of celiac-specific antibodies. The diagnosis is confirmed by duodenal mucosal biopsies. Both serology and biopsy should be performed on a gluten-containing diet. The treatment for celiac disease is primarily a gluten-free diet (GFD), which requires significant patient education, motivation, and follow-up. Non-responsive celiac disease occurs frequently, particularly in those diagnosed in adulthood. Persistent or recurring symptoms should lead to a review of the patient's original diagnosis to exclude alternative diagnoses, a review of the GFD to ensure there is no obvious gluten contamination, and serologic testing to confirm adherence with the GFD. In addition, evaluation for disorders associated with celiac disease that could cause persistent symptoms, such as microscopic colitis, pancreatic exocrine dysfunction, and complications of celiac disease, such as enteropathy-associated lymphoma or refractory celiac disease, should be entertained. Newer therapeutic modalities are being studied in clinical trials, but are not yet approved for use in practice. Given the incomplete response of many patients to a GFD-free diet as well as the difficulty of adherence to the GFD over the long term, development of new effective therapies for symptom control and reversal of inflammation and organ damage are needed. The prevalence of celiac disease is increasing worldwide and many patients with celiac disease remain undiagnosed, highlighting the need for improved strategies in the future for the optimal detection of patients.

Section 3: European Society for the Study of Coeliac Disease 2025 Updated Guidelines on the Diagnosis and Management of Coeliac Disease in Adults. Part 1: Diagnostic Approach.
Source: United European gastroenterology journal (2025)
----------------------------------------
Since the publication of the first European Society for the Study of Coeliac Disease (ESsCD) guidelines in 2019, significant advancements have emerged in the diagnosis of coeliac disease (CeD) in adults. These 2025 guidelines incorporate new evidence to refine diagnostic strategies, aiming for improved accuracy of testing, and enhance overall quality of clinical care.

Section 4: Current guidelines for the management of celiac disease: A systematic review with comparative analysis.
Source: World journal of gastroenterology (2022)
----------------------------------------
Wheat and other gluten-containing grains are widely consumed, providing approximately 50% of the caloric intake in both industrialised and developing countries. The widespread diffusion of gluten-containing diets has rapidly led to a sharp increase in celiac disease prevalence. This condition was thought to be very rare outside Europe and relatively ignored by health professionals and the global media. However, in recent years, the discovery of important diagnostic and pathogenic milestones has led to the emergence of celiac disease (CD) from obscurity to global prominence. These modifications have prompted experts worldwide to identify effective strategies for the diagnosis and follow-up of CD. Different scientific societies, mainly from Europe and America, have proposed guidelines based on CD's most recent evidence.

Section 5: Updated joint ESPGHAN/NASPGHAN guidelines for management of Helicobacter pylori infection in children and adolescents (2023).
Source: Journal of pediatric gastroenterology and nutrition (2024)
----------------------------------------
Evolving epidemiological data and increasing antibiotic resistance mandate an update of the European and North American Societies of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition guidelines.

