Clinical Topic: Depression Treatment Clinical Guidelines
============================================================

Section 1: Guidelines for the evaluation and treatment of perimenopausal depression: summary and recommendations.
Source: Menopause (New York, N.Y.) (2018)
----------------------------------------
There is a new appreciation of the perimenopause - defined as the early and late menopause transition stages as well as the early postmenopause - as a window of vulnerability for the development of both depressive symptoms and major depressive episodes. However, clinical recommendations on how to identify, characterize and treat clinical depression are lacking. To address this gap, an expert panel was convened to systematically review the published literature and develop guidelines on the evaluation and management of perimenopausal depression. The areas addressed included: 1) epidemiology; 2) clinical presentation; 3) therapeutic effects of antidepressants; 4) effects of hormone therapy; and 5) efficacy of other therapies (eg, psychotherapy, exercise, and natural health products). Overall, evidence generally suggests that most midlife women who experience a major depressive episode during the perimenopause have experienced a prior episode of depression. Midlife depression presents with classic depressive symptoms commonly in combination with menopause symptoms (ie, vasomotor symptoms, sleep disturbance), and psychosocial challenges. Menopause symptoms complicate, co-occur, and overlap with the presentation of depression. Diagnosis involves identification of menopausal stage, assessment of co-occurring psychiatric and menopause symptoms, appreciation of the psychosocial factors common in midlife, differential diagnoses, and the use of validated screening instruments. Proven therapeutic options for depression (ie, antidepressants, psychotherapy) are the front-line treatments for perimenopausal depression. Although estrogen therapy is not approved to treat perimenopausal depression, there is evidence that it has antidepressant effects in perimenopausal women, particularly those with concomitant vasomotor symptoms. Data on estrogen plus progestin are sparse and inconclusive.

Section 2: Electroconvulsive therapy for treatment-resistant depression.
Source: Progress in brain research (2023)
----------------------------------------
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), the oldest brain stimulation procedure in psychiatry, is associated with rapid response and remission in majority of patients with resistant, severe, and sometimes life-threatening depression. ECT has been included as an essential component in the definition of treatment-resistant depression (TRD) to display the course and diversification of TRD. On the other hand, ECT remains the treatment of choice for the most severe incapacitating forms of TRD and is a cost-effective treatment. In this chapter, we reviewed some essential studies, meta-analysis, and expert guidelines regarding ECT in TRD. ECT should not be considered as a treatment of last resort, and its administration should be considered on the basis of individual patient and illness factors. The clinical role of ECT vs other neurostimulation treatments for TRD, that is, repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation, were also explored. Much effort has been directed toward the clinical and basic research about mechanisms of action of ECT in depression. A thorough understanding of the neurobiological effects of ECT may increase our understanding of its therapeutic effects, ultimately leading to improved patient care. We also showed that the distinct mechanisms of ECT in biological treatments of major depressive disorder (MDD) and some recent approaches to understand this most common psychiatric disorder. ECT should remain a standard part of modern psychiatric medicine. We recommend a more careful and thoughtful application of this traditional but effective technology.

Section 3: Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids in Depression.
Source: International journal of molecular sciences (2024)
----------------------------------------
Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids have received considerable attention in the field of mental health, in particular regarding the treatment of depression. This review presents an overview of current research on the role of omega-3 fatty acids in the prevention and treatment of depressive disorders. The existing body of evidence demonstrates that omega-3 fatty acids, in particular eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), have antidepressant effects that can be attributed to their modulation of neuroinflammation, neurotransmitter function, and neuroplasticity. Nevertheless, clinical trials of omega-3 supplementation have yielded inconsistent results. Some studies have demonstrated significant reductions in depressive symptoms following omega-3 treatment, whereas others have shown minimal to no beneficial impact. A range of factors, encompassing dosage, the ratio of EPA to DHA, and baseline nutritional status, have been identified as having a potential impact on the noted results. Furthermore, it has been suggested that omega-3 fatty acids may act as an adjunctive treatment for those undergoing antidepressant treatment. Notwithstanding these encouraging findings, discrepancies in study designs and variability in individual responses underscore the necessity of further research in order to establish uniform, standardized guidelines for the use of omega-3 fatty acids in the management of depressive disorders.

Section 4: Cultural variations in the clinical presentation of depression and anxiety: implications for diagnosis and treatment.
Source: The Journal of clinical psychiatry (2001)
----------------------------------------
This article reviews cultural variations in the clinical presentation of depression and anxiety. Culture-specific symptoms may lead to underrecognition or misidentification of psychological distress. Contrary to the claim that non-Westerners are prone to somatize their distress, recent research confirms that somatization is ubiquitous. Somatic symptoms serve as cultural idioms of distress in many ethnocultural groups and, if misinterpreted by the clinician, may lead to unnecessary diagnostic procedures or inappropriate treatment. Clinicians must learn to decode the meaning of somatic and dissociative symptoms, which are not simply indices of disease or disorder but part of a language of distress with interpersonal and wider social meanings. Implications of these findings for the recognition and treatment of depressive disorders among culturally diverse populations in primary care and mental health settings are discussed.

Section 5: Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT) 2016 Clinical Guidelines for the Management of Adults with Major Depressive Disorder: Section 3. Pharmacological Treatments.
Source: Canadian journal of psychiatry. Revue canadienne de psychiatrie (2016)
----------------------------------------
The Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT) conducted a revision of the 2009 guidelines by updating the evidence and recommendations. The scope of the 2016 guidelines remains the management of major depressive disorder (MDD) in adults, with a target audience of psychiatrists and other mental health professionals.

