Clinical Topic: Diabetic Retinopathy Screening
============================================================

Section 1: Diabetic retinopathy: Screening, prevention, and treatment.
Source: Cleveland Clinic journal of medicine (2024)
----------------------------------------
Internists are integral in the multidisciplinary approach to diabetic retinopathy, contributing significantly to the management of diabetes and diabetes-related complications. Effective screening processes, timely referrals, and strategic diabetes management are imperative to prevent and mitigate the consequences of diabetic retinopathy. The evolution of treatments for diabetic retinopathy has markedly improved vision outcomes and reduced the burden on patients. Despite these advances, a collaborative approach to care is essential to prevent the progression of vision impairment and manage associated complications.

Section 2: Update in the epidemiology, risk factors, screening, and treatment of diabetic retinopathy.
Source: Journal of diabetes investigation (2021)
----------------------------------------
Despite progress in the treatment of diabetic macular edema and diabetic retinopathy, the rate of lower fundus examination due to limitations of medical resources delays the diagnosis and treatment of diabetic retinopathy. Therefore, implementation of automated diabetic retinopathy screening program and the identification of more specific and sensitive biomarkers are important for facilitating the earlier detection of diabetic macular edema and diabetic retinopathy to decrease the prevalence of poor vision and blindness.

Section 3: Diabetic retinopathy screening in the emerging era of artificial intelligence.
Source: Diabetologia (2022)
----------------------------------------
Diabetic retinopathy is a frequent complication in diabetes and a leading cause of visual impairment. Regular eye screening is imperative to detect sight-threatening stages of diabetic retinopathy such as proliferative diabetic retinopathy and diabetic macular oedema in order to treat these before irreversible visual loss occurs. Screening is cost-effective and has been implemented in various countries in Europe and elsewhere. Along with optimised diabetes care, this has substantially reduced the risk of visual loss. Nevertheless, the growing number of patients with diabetes poses an increasing burden on healthcare systems and automated solutions are needed to alleviate the task of screening and improve diagnostic accuracy. Deep learning by convolutional neural networks is an optimised branch of artificial intelligence that is particularly well suited to automated image analysis. Pivotal studies have demonstrated high sensitivity and specificity for classifying advanced stages of diabetic retinopathy and identifying diabetic macular oedema in optical coherence tomography scans. Based on this, different algorithms have obtained regulatory approval for clinical use and have recently been implemented to some extent in a few countries. Handheld mobile devices are another promising option for self-monitoring, but so far they have not demonstrated comparable image quality to that of fundus photography using non-portable retinal cameras, which is the gold standard for diabetic retinopathy screening. Such technology has the potential to be integrated in telemedicine-based screening programmes, enabling self-captured retinal images to be transferred virtually to reading centres for analysis and planning of further steps. While emerging technologies have shown a lot of promise, clinical implementation has been sparse. Legal obstacles and difficulties in software integration may partly explain this, but it may also indicate that existing algorithms may not necessarily integrate well with national screening initiatives, which often differ substantially between countries.

Section 4: Diabetic retinopathy in the pediatric population: Pathophysiology, screening, current and future treatments.
Source: Pharmacological research (2023)
----------------------------------------
Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is a sight threatening complication of diabetes mellitus (DM). The incidence of DR in the pediatric population has increased in the last two decades and it is expected to further rise in the future, following the increase in DM prevalence and obesity in youth. As early stages of the retinal disease are asymptomatic, screening programs are of extreme importance to guarantee a prompt diagnosis and avoid progression to more advanced, sight threatening stages. The management of DR comprises a wide range of actions starting from glycemic control, continuing with systemic and local medical treatments, up to para-surgical and surgical approaches to deal with the more aggressive complications. In this review we will describe the pathophysiology of DR trying to understand all the possible targets for currently available or future treatments. We will briefly consider the impact of screening techniques, screening strategies and their social and economic impact. Finally a large part of the review will be dedicated to medical and surgical treatments for DR including both currently available and under development therapies. Most of the available data in the literature on DR are focused on the adult population. The aim of our work is to provide clinicians and researchers with a comprehensive overview of the state of the art regarding DR in the pediatric population, considering the increasing numbers of this diseases in youth and the inevitable consequences that such a chronic disease could have if poorly managed in children.

Section 5: Update on Screening for Sight-Threatening Diabetic Retinopathy.
Source: Ophthalmic research (2019)
----------------------------------------
The aim of this article was to describe recent advances in the use of new technology in diabetic retinopathy screening by looking at studies that assessed the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of these technologies.

