Clinical Topic: Glaucoma Treatment Guidelines
============================================================

Section 1: European Glaucoma Society Terminology and Guidelines for Glaucoma, 5th Edition.
Source: The British journal of ophthalmology (2021)
----------------------------------------
The only time is now. Every "now" is unique. Responsible persons ask themselves, "How can I act well now?" The answers will differ for every person, because just as every situation is unique, so is every person different from every other person. But surely there must be some algorithm that will assist us in coming to the right answer. Unfortunately, no, for there is no right answer. There is only an answer that is as appropriate as we can conclude at that moment in that situation. No written guidelines can apply appropriately to every unique situation.Unfortunately we physicians have been suckled on a fallacy: "What's good for the goose is good for the gander." Phrased in medical terms, "normal findings are good, and abnormal findings are bad." This is too simple, and often wrong.Good clinicians know that care must be personalized for it to be optimal. So-called normal findings give rough guidance, sometimes applicable to groups, but frequently wrong for individuals. Consider intraocular pressure (IOP). A normal IOP of 15 mmHg good for some and bad for others, and an abnormal IOP of 30 mmHg is good for some and bad for others. We are so bombarded by the myth of the sanctity of the standard distribution curve that it is hard to think independently and specifically. Also, unfortunately, doctors are prone to decide for patients, often on the basis of normative data that is not relevant or important for the particular patient. That we do this is not surprising, as we want to help, and so we default to what seems to be the easy, safe (non-thinking) way, in which we do not have to hold ourselves accountable for the outcome.Somebody HAS to decide, or else we would be living in an anarchical world. Also true. And because none of us knows as much as we need to know to act appropriately, we seek advice from so-called "experts."For us to care for people well it is essential that we consider what others recommend. So we look to experts, as we should. However, experts are sometimes right and sometimes wrong. Remember that von Graefe in 1860 recommended surgical iridectomy for all glaucoma, Elliot recommended mustard plaster between the shoulders for glaucoma, Becker based treatment on tonographic findings, Weve reported 100% success with penetrating cyclodiathermy in glaucoma, Lichter advised against laser trabeculoplasty, many thought Cypass was great, and the investigators in the Advanced Glaucoma Intervention Study indicated that an IOP usually around 12 mmHg was better than one usually around 20 mmHg. All wrong. What the authors of these guidelines have done excellently, is to provide a general framework on which ophthalmologists can hang pieces of evidence, so as to be able to evaluate the validity and the importance of that evidence. In doing this meticulously they have provided a valuable service to all ophthalmologists, none of whom individually have either the time or the skill to be fully informed. In their own practices the authors consider whether valid information is relevant for the particular person being considered. That process of considering relevance is essential, always. And relevance is based on the particular unique patient, unique doctor and unique situation. The only guideline the authors can provide in this regard is to remind us all to consider relevance with all patients in all situations, and from the patient's perspective. Even more important than the service to ophthalmologists is the benefit to patients that will result from thoughtful use of these guidelines.We need, also, to remember that diagnoses are generic, and that within every diagnosis there are differences. For example what does a diagnosis of primary open angle mean? Some of those affected will rapidly go blind despite the most thoughtful treatment and others will keep their sight even without treatment. What does a diagnosis of Chandler's Syndrome mean? In some, surgery works well, and, in others, poorly. So one never directs diagnosis and treatment at a condition, but rather at the person, the objective being the wellness of that person.The previous European Glaucoma Society Guidelines are used internationally. It is good that the EGS is again providing updated, useful information.The Guidelines are a practical, inspirational contribution.

Section 2: Guidelines for treatment of chronic primary angle-closure glaucoma.
Source: Archivos de la Sociedad Espanola de Oftalmologia (2015)
----------------------------------------
To present a clinical practice guideline update on the medical, laser, and surgical treatment of primary angle closure glaucoma (PACG) in adults.

Section 3: Systematic review and appraisal of quality, definitions and treatment recommendations of clinical guidelines for glaucoma suspects.
Source: Clinical & experimental ophthalmology (2024)
----------------------------------------
To appraise the quality of clinical practice guidelines for glaucoma suspects, and to assess their consistency for how a 'glaucoma suspect' is defined and their recommendations for treatment initiation for such individuals.

Section 4: Neovascular glaucoma - A review.
Source: Indian journal of ophthalmology (2021)
----------------------------------------
Neovascular glaucoma (NVG) is a sight-threatening secondary glaucoma characterized by appearance of new vessels over the iris and proliferation of fibrovascular tissue in the anterior chamber angle. Retinal ischemia is the common driving factor and common causes are central retinal vein occlusion, proliferative diabetic retinopathy, and ocular ischemic syndrome. The current rise in the prevalence of NVG is partly related to increase in people with diabetes. A high index of suspicion and a thorough anterior segment evaluation to identify the early new vessels on the iris surface or angle are essential for early diagnosis of NVG. With newer imaging modalities such as the optical coherence tomography angiography and newer treatment options such as the anti-vascular endothelial growth factor, it is possible to detect retinal ischemia early, tailor appropriate treatment, monitor disease progression, and treatment response. The management strategies are aimed at reducing the posterior segment ischemia, reduce the neovascular drive, and control the elevated intraocular pressure. This review summarizes the causes, pathogenesis, and differential diagnoses of NVG, and the management guidelines. We also propose a treatment algorithm of neovascular glaucoma.

Section 5: The Japan Glaucoma Society guidelines for glaucoma 5th edition.
Source: Japanese journal of ophthalmology (2023)
----------------------------------------
We are pleased to bring you the 5th edition of the Glaucoma Clinical Practice Guidelines. Clinical practice guidelines are based on evidence (scientific grounds). It is a document that presents the treatment that is the most appropriate for the patient. "Glaucoma Clinical Guidelines" was first published in 2003. This was the first guideline for glaucoma treatment in Japan. The principle of glaucoma treatment is to lower intraocular pressure. Means for lowering intraocular pressure includes drugs, lasers, and surgery; Glaucoma is a disease that should be considered as a complex syndrome rather than a single condition. Therefore, the actual medical treatment is not as simple as one word. This time we set the Clinical Questionnaire with a focus on glaucoma treatment. We hope that you will take advantage of the 5th edition.

