Clinical Topic: Hepatitis C Treatment Guidelines
============================================================

Section 1: EASL recommendations on treatment of hepatitis C: Final update of the series
Source: Journal of hepatology (2020)
----------------------------------------
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is a major cause of chronic liver disease, with approximately 71 million chronically infected individuals worldwide. Clinical care for patients with HCV-related liver disease has advanced considerably thanks to an enhanced understanding of the pathophysiology of the disease, as well as developments in diagnostic procedures and improvements in therapy and prevention. These therapies make it possible to eliminate hepatitis C as a major public health threat, as per the World Health Organization target, although the timeline and feasibility vary from region to region. These European Association for the Study of the Liver recommendations on treatment of hepatitis C describe the optimal management of patients with recently acquired and chronic HCV infections in 2020 and onwards.

Section 2: SASLT guidelines: Update in treatment of hepatitis C virus infection, 2024.
Source: Saudi journal of gastroenterology : official journal of the Saudi Gastroenterology Association (2024)
----------------------------------------
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection has been a major global health concern, with a significant impact on public health. In recent years, there have been remarkable advancements in our understanding of HCV and the development of novel therapeutic agents. The Saudi Society for the Study of Liver Disease and Transplantation formed a working group to develop HCV practice guidelines in Saudi Arabia. The methodology used to create these guidelines involved a comprehensive review of available evidence, local data, and major international practice guidelines regarding HCV management. This updated guideline encompasses critical aspects of HCV care, including screening and diagnosis, assessing the severity of liver disease, and treatment strategies. The aim of this updated guideline is to assist healthcare providers in the management of HCV in Saudi Arabia. It summarizes the latest local studies on HCV epidemiology, significant changes in virus prevalence, and the importance of universal screening, particularly among high-risk populations. Moreover, it discusses the promising potential for HCV elimination as a public health threat by 2030, driven by effective treatment and comprehensive prevention strategies. This guideline also highlights evolving recommendations for advancing disease management, including the treatment of HCV patients with decompensated cirrhosis, treatment of those who have previously failed treatment with the newer medications, management in the context of liver transplantation and hepatocellular carcinoma, and treatment for special populations.

Section 3: Hepatitis C: Diagnosis and Management.
Source: American family physician (2021)
----------------------------------------
Screening recommendations and treatment guidelines for hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection have been updated. People at the greatest risk of HCV infection are those between 18 and 39 years of age and those who use injection drugs. Universal screening with an anti-HCV antibody test with follow-up reflex HCV RNA polymerase chain reaction testing for positive results to confirm active disease is recommended at least once for all adults 18 years and older and during each pregnancy. Any person with ongoing risk factors should be screened periodically as long as the at-risk behavior persists. One-time screening is recommended for patients younger than 18 years with risk factors. For treatment-naive adults without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosis, a simplified treatment regimen consisting of eight weeks of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir or 12 weeks of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir results in greater than 95% cure rates. Undetectable HCV RNA 12 weeks after completing therapy is considered a virologic cure (i.e., sustained virologic response). A sustained virologic response is associated with lower all-cause mortality and improves hepatic and extrahepatic manifestations, cognitive function, physical health, work productivity, and quality of life. In patients with compensated cirrhosis, posttreatment surveillance for hepatocellular carcinoma and esophageal varices should include abdominal ultrasonography (with or without alpha fetoprotein) every six months and upper endoscopy every two to three years. In the absence of cirrhosis, no liver-related follow-up is recommended.

Section 4: Treatment of hepatitis C virus infection: updated Swedish Guidelines 2016.
Source: Infectious diseases (London, England) (2017)
----------------------------------------
In a recent expert meeting, Swedish recommendations for the treatment of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection were updated. An interferon-free combination of direct-acting antiviral agents is considered and indicated for all patients with chronic HCV infection, but the ability to treat all is limited primarily by high cost of medication. The group of patients prioritized for therapeutic intervention has been extended to also include fertile women desiring to become pregnant. A more thorough discussion of treatment for people who inject drugs (PWIDs) in order to diminish transmission is included, and the clinical significance of baseline NS5A resistance associated variants (RAVs), also known as resistance associated substitutions (RASs), for the treatment of HCV genotype 1a or 3 infection is discussed.

Section 5: Treatment guidelines for Hepatitis C in Spain.
Source: Revista espanola de sanidad penitenciaria (2015)
----------------------------------------
The discovery of new orally administered drugs that can block different targets of the replication cycle of the hepatitis C virus (HCV) with major antiviral activity, has revolutionized treatment of this infection and relegated interferon-based treatments to a secondary position. The start up of the National Strategic Plan for Combating Hepatitis C, which acknowledges the greater efficacy and safety of oral antiviral drugs, as well as the agreements between the pharmaceutical companies and different government bodies has enabled the initial difficulties of access to these medicines due to their high cost to be overcome. In this rapidly changing environment, the availability of a therapeutic guide based on a critical analysis of the available evidence, takes on special relevance and provides a basic support for medical practitioners involved in HCV treatment. However, the speed with which new therapeutic options are included and the limited evidence in some clinical scenarios signifies a challenge for those responsible for scientific societies whose job it is to coordinate the preparation of therapeutic guides and to keep recommendations up to date. In this review we analyze the treatment recommendations for HCV in a consensus document drawn up by the Spanish Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AEEH), to contrast them with recommendations given by American and European associations that study hepatic diseases.

