Clinical Topic: Lung Cancer Screening Guidelines
============================================================

Section 1: NCCN Guidelines® Insights: Lung Cancer Screening, Version 1.2025.
Source: Journal of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network : JNCCN (2025)
----------------------------------------
The NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guidelines) for Lung Cancer Screening provide criteria for selecting individuals for screening and offer recommendations for evaluating and managing lung nodules detected during initial and subsequent annual screening. These NCCN Guidelines Insights focus on recent updates to the NCCN Guidelines for Lung Cancer Screening.

Section 2: Lung Cancer Screening.
Source: Seminars in respiratory and critical care medicine (2022)
----------------------------------------
Lung cancer is a leading cause of cancer death in the United States and globally with the majority of lung cancer cases attributable to cigarette smoking. Given the high societal and personal cost of a diagnosis of lung cancer including that most cases of lung cancer when diagnosed are found at a late stage, work over the past 40 years has aimed to detect lung cancer earlier when curative treatment is possible. Screening trials using chest radiography and sputum failed to show a reduction in lung cancer mortality however multiple studies using low dose CT have shown the ability to detect lung cancer early and a survival benefit to those screened. This review will discuss the history of lung cancer screening, current recommendations and screening guidelines, and implementation and components of a lung cancer screening program.

Section 3: Lung Cancer: Diagnosis, Treatment Principles, and Screening.
Source: American family physician (2022)
----------------------------------------
Lung cancer is the second most common cancer in men and women in the United States; however, it remains the leading cause of cancer-related death in the United States and worldwide. The most common but nonspecific symptom of lung cancer is cough. Associated symptoms, including hemoptysis or shortness of breath, or systemic symptoms, including anorexia or weight loss, greatly increase the likelihood of having lung cancer. Referral to a multidisciplinary lung cancer team, imaging, and confirmation through sputum cytology, thoracentesis, fine-needle aspiration, or mediastinoscopy are recommended. If lung cancer is confirmed, treatment options vary based on staging, histology, immunotherapy biomarker testing, and patient health status. Treatments include surgical resection, immunotherapy, chemotherapy, and/or radiotherapy. Family physicians should focus on primary prevention of lung cancer by encouraging tobacco cessation and early recognition by screening at-risk individuals and following guidelines for pulmonary nodules. As of 2021, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommends annual lung cancer screening using low-dose computed tomography starting at 50 years of age in patients with a 20 pack-year history.

Section 4: Screening for lung cancer: 2023 guideline update from the American Cancer Society.
Source: CA: a cancer journal for clinicians (2024)
----------------------------------------
Lung cancer is the leading cause of mortality and person-years of life lost from cancer among US men and women. Early detection has been shown to be associated with reduced lung cancer mortality. Our objective was to update the American Cancer Society (ACS) 2013 lung cancer screening (LCS) guideline for adults at high risk for lung cancer. The guideline is intended to provide guidance for screening to health care providers and their patients who are at high risk for lung cancer due to a history of smoking. The ACS Guideline Development Group (GDG) utilized a systematic review of the LCS literature commissioned for the US Preventive Services Task Force 2021 LCS recommendation update; a second systematic review of lung cancer risk associated with years since quitting smoking (YSQ); literature published since 2021; two Cancer Intervention and Surveillance Modeling Network-validated lung cancer models to assess the benefits and harms of screening; an epidemiologic and modeling analysis examining the effect of YSQ and aging on lung cancer risk; and an updated analysis of benefit-to-radiation-risk ratios from LCS and follow-up examinations. The GDG also examined disease burden data from the National Cancer Institute's Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results program. Formulation of recommendations was based on the quality of the evidence and judgment (incorporating values and preferences) about the balance of benefits and harms. The GDG judged that the overall evidence was moderate and sufficient to support a strong recommendation for screening individuals who meet the eligibility criteria. LCS in men and women aged 50-80 years is associated with a reduction in lung cancer deaths across a range of study designs, and inferential evidence supports LCS for men and women older than 80 years who are in good health. The ACS recommends annual LCS with low-dose computed tomography for asymptomatic individuals aged 50-80 years who currently smoke or formerly smoked and have a ≥20 pack-year smoking history (strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence). Before the decision is made to initiate LCS, individuals should engage in a shared decision-making discussion with a qualified health professional. For individuals who formerly smoked, the number of YSQ is not an eligibility criterion to begin or to stop screening. Individuals who currently smoke should receive counseling to quit and be connected to cessation resources. Individuals with comorbid conditions that substantially limit life expectancy should not be screened. These recommendations should be considered by health care providers and adults at high risk for lung cancer in discussions about LCS. If fully implemented, these recommendations have a high likelihood of significantly reducing death and suffering from lung cancer in the United States.

