Clinical Topic: Rheumatoid Arthritis Treatment
============================================================

Section 1: Treatment Guidelines in Rheumatoid Arthritis.
Source: Rheumatic diseases clinics of North America (2022)
----------------------------------------
Rheumatoid arthritis is the most common autoimmune, destructive, inflammatory arthritis in adults. Effective treatments include oral conventional synthetic disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs; eg, methotrexate), injectable biologic DMARDs, and targeted synthetic DMARDs (oral). Key recommendations are to start effective treatment immediately with DMARDs to reduce disability; use effective doses of methotrexate (oral or subcutaneous) with folic acid as the initial treatment; rapidly escalate treatment with various DMARDs, if methotrexate alone is not effective in controlling rheumatoid arthritis; and aim for a treat-to-target strategy with a goal of low disease activity or remission by frequently monitoring disease activity and escalating treatment.

Section 2: Rheumatoid arthritis: advances in treatment strategies.
Source: Molecular and cellular biochemistry (2023)
----------------------------------------
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is characterised by severe joint and bone damage due to heightened autoimmune response at the articular sites. Worldwide annual incidence and prevalence rate of RA is 3 cases per 10,000 population and 1%, respectively. Several genetic and environmental (microbiota, smoking, infectious agents) factors contribute to its pathogenesis. Although convention treatment strategies, predominantly Disease Modifying Anti Rheumatic Drugs (DMARDs) and Glucocorticoids (GC), are unchanged as the primary line of treatment; novel strategies consisting of biological DMARDs, are being developed and explored. Personalized approaches using biologicals targetspecific pathways associated with disease progression. However, considering the economic burden and side-effects associated with these, there is an unmet need on strategies for early stratification of the inadequate responders with cDMARDs. As RA is a complex disease with a variable remission rate, it is important not only to evaluate the current status of drugs in clinical practice but also those with the potential of personalised therapeutics. Here, we provide comprehensive data on the treatment strategies in RA, including studies exploring various combination strategies in clinical trials. Our systematic analysis of current literature found that conventional DMARDs along with glucocorticoid may be best suited for early RA cases and a combination of conventional and targeted DMARDs could be effective for treating seronegative patients with moderate to high RA activity. Clinical trials with insufficient responders to Methotrexate suggest that adding biologicals may help in such cases. However, certain adverse events associated with the current therapy advocate exploring novel therapeutic approaches such as gene therapy, mesenchymal stem cell therapy in future.

Section 3: Novel treatment strategies in rheumatoid arthritis.
Source: Lancet (London, England) (2017)
----------------------------------------
New treatment strategies have substantially changed the course of rheumatoid arthritis. Many patients can achieve remission if the disease is recognised early and is treated promptly and continuously; however, some individuals do not respond adequately to treatment. Rapid diagnosis and a treat-to-target approach with tight monitoring and control, can increase the likelihood of remission in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. In this Series paper, we describe new insights into the management of rheumatoid arthritis with targeted therapy approaches using classic and novel medications, and outline the potential effects of precision medicine in this challenging disease. Articles are included that investigate the treat-to-target approach, which includes adding or de-escalating treatment. Rheumatoid arthritis treatment is impeded by delayed diagnosis, problematic access to specialists, and difficulties adhering to treat-to-target principles. Clinical management goals in rheumatoid arthritis include enabling rapid access to optimum diagnosis and care and the well informed use of multiple treatments approved for this disease.

Section 4: Prevention and treatment of rheumatoid arthritis through traditional Chinese medicine: role of the gut microbiota.
Source: Frontiers in immunology (2023)
----------------------------------------
Recently, despite the increasing availability of treatments for Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), the incidence of RA and associated disability-adjusted life years have been on the rise globally in the late decades. At present, accumulating evidence has been advanced that RA is related to the gut microbiota, therefore, the therapeutic approaches for RA by regulating the gut microbiota are anticipated to become a new means of treatment. Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) can regulate immunity, reduce inflammation and improve quality of life in various ways. Moreover, it can treat diseases by affecting the gut microbiota, which is a good way to treat RA. In this review, we mainly explore the relationship between TCM and gut microbiota regarding the perspective of treating RA. Moreover, we comprehensively summarize the roles of gut microbiota in the onset, development, progression, and prognosis of RA. Additionally, we elucidate the mechanism of TCM prevention and treatment of RA by the role of microbiota. Finally, we provide an evidence-based rationale for further investigation of microbiota-targeted intervention by TCM.

Section 5: Nonpharmacological treatment in established rheumatoid arthritis.
Source: Best practice & research. Clinical rheumatology (2019)
----------------------------------------
The goals in the management of established rheumatoid arthritis (RA) are to control pain and disease activity, prevent further joint damage, and enhance functioning and quality of life. Despite the fact that aggressive and the early use of biological and nonbiological disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs have been associated with substantial gains in clinical, radiological, and disability outcomes, a considerable proportion of patients still report significant problems of physical, emotional and social functioning, and unmet needs in established RA. Therefore, nonpharmacological treatments are also administered for patients with RA. The aim of this article is to overview the nonpharmacological, therapeutical, and rehabilitative interventions, to minimize the consequences of the disease in patients with established RA. First, the principles of functional assessment in RA will be addressed. Then nonpharmacological interventions including therapeutic patient education, exercise therapy, physical modalities, orthoses, assistive devices, dietary interventions, and balneotherapy will be reviewed in the light of evidence-based literature data.

