Clinical Topic: Type 2 Diabetes Treatment Guidelines
============================================================

Section 1: Early onset type 2 diabetes mellitus: an update.
Source: Endocrine (2024)
----------------------------------------
The incidence and prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in young individuals (aged <40 years) have significantly increased in recent years, approximating two to threefold increase in the respective rates. Numerous risk factors including severe obesity, family history, ethnicity, maternal diabetes or gestational diabetes, and female sex contribute to a younger age of onset. In terms of pathogenesis, impaired insulin secretion is the key operating mechanism, alongside with ectopic adiposity-related insulin resistance. T2DM diagnosis in a young adult requires the exclusion of type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM), latent autoimmune diabetes of adults (LADA) and maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). The establishment of such diagnosis is critical for prognosis, because early-onset T2DM is associated with rapid deterioration in pancreatic β-cell secretory function leading to earlier initiation of insulin therapy. Furthermore, mortality and lifetime risk of developing complications, especially microvascular, is increased in these patients compared to both later-onset T2DM and T1DM patients; also, the latter are often developed earlier in the course of disease. The management of early-onset T2DM follows the same guidelines as in later-onset T2DM; yet patients aged 18-39 years are underrepresented in the big clinical trials on which the development of guidelines is based. Finally, young people with T2DM face significant challenges associated with social determinants, which compromise their adherence to therapy and induce diabetes distress. Future research focusing on the pathogenesis of β-cell decline and complications, as well as on specific treatment shall lead to better understanding and management of early-onset T2DM.

Section 2: Diagnosis and Treatment of Hyperglycemia in Pregnancy: Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus and Gestational Diabetes.
Source: Endocrinology and metabolism clinics of North America (2024)
----------------------------------------
Hyperglycemia in pregnancy due to pre-existing Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is rising globally with increasing rates of risk factors for metabolic disease. This review summarizes current evidence and recommendations from national and international guidelines for diagnosis and management of T2DM and GDM to optimize maternal and neonatal outcomes.

Section 3: Type 2 diabetes in children and adolescents: Challenges for treatment and potential solutions.
Source: Diabetes research and clinical practice (2024)
----------------------------------------
Historically perceived as a disease mainly affecting adults, the prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) among children and adolescents has been rising, mirroring the increasing rates of childhood obesity. Currently, youth-onset T2DM poses a significant public health challenge globally. Treating youth-onset T2DM poses numerous critical challenges, namely limited and inadequate therapeutic options, and difficulties with conducting therapeutic studies. As a result, current treatment guidelines are based on adult studies and expert consensus. Few prominent guidelines on the treatment of youth-onset T2DM have been published recently, i.e., by the American Diabetes Association (ADA) 2024, National Institute for Healthcare and Excellence United Kingdom (NICE UK) 2023, International Society Paediatric and Adolescents Diabetes (ISPAD) 2022, Australasian Paediatric Endocrine Group (APEG) 2020 and Diabetes Canada 2018. This review first explores the unique aspects of youth-onset T2DM. It then summarises the different treatment guidelines, discusses the different treatment modalities based on available evidence and identifies any gaps. The review also explores challenges in the treatment of youth-onset T2DM with potential solutions and discusses recent trials on the treatment of youth-onset T2DM. Continued research aims to optimise treatment, improve outcomes, and alleviate the burden of T2DM on youths.

Section 4: Cognitive impairment and type 2 diabetes mellitus: Focus of SGLT2 inhibitors treatment.
Source: Pharmacological research (2022)
----------------------------------------
Gliflozins are a novel class of oral anti-diabetic drugs, acting as inhibitors of sodium-glucose co-transporters (SGLTs) through the proximal convoluted tubules (PCT) and intestinal epithelium. The sodium-glucose co-transporters 2 (SGLT2) are mainly expressed in S1 and S2 segments of the proximal convoluted tubule in the kidneys. Clinical guidelines recommend their use especially in Type 2 Diabetes mellitus (T2DM) patients with vascular complications and/or heart failure highlighting the importance of sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitors (SGLT2i) pleiotropic effects. Interestingly, cognitive decline is a widely recognized complication of T2DM and, in addition, to clarify its pathophysiology, there is an urgent need to understand how and if diabetes therapies can control diabetes-related cognitive dysfunction. At the time, although SGLT2 proteins are present in the Central Nervous System (CNS), the SGLT2i effects on cognitive impairments remain partly unknown. In pre-clinical studies, SGLT2i ameliorates cognitive dysfunction in obese and T2DM mice, reducing oxidative stress, neuroinflammation and improving neuronal plasticity and mitochondrial brain pathway. In addition, SGLT2i could bring back mTOR to a physiological state of activation, stopping neurodegenerative diseases' onset or progression. Instead, clinical studies on T2DM-related cognitive dysfunction treated by SGLT2i are much more limited. For these reasons, further studies are needed to better elucidate if SGLT2i therapy can affect T2DM-related cognitive decline. In this scenario, this review aims to summarize the state of knowledge on the role of SGLT2i in T2DM-related cognitive dysfunction and stimulate new clinical trials.

Section 5: Guidelines for Cardiovascular Risk Reduction in Patients With Type 2 Diabetes: JACC Guideline Comparison.
Source: Journal of the American College of Cardiology (2022)
----------------------------------------
Cardiovascular disease is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus. These high-risk patients benefit from aggressive risk factor management, with blood pressure and low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol treatment, glycemic control, kidney protection, and lifestyle intervention. There are several recommendation and guideline documents across cardiology, endocrinology, nephrology, and general medicine professional societies from the United States and Europe with recommendations for cardiovascular risk reduction in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Although there are some noteworthy differences, particularly in risk stratification, low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol and blood pressure treatment targets, and the use of sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors and glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists, overall there is considerable alignment across recommendations from different professional societies.

